Return-Path: <kernel-hardening-return-20752-lists+kernel-hardening=lfdr.de@lists.openwall.com>
X-Original-To: lists+kernel-hardening@lfdr.de
Delivered-To: lists+kernel-hardening@lfdr.de
Received: from mother.openwall.net (mother.openwall.net [195.42.179.200])
	by mail.lfdr.de (Postfix) with SMTP id 148DC318501
	for <lists+kernel-hardening@lfdr.de>; Thu, 11 Feb 2021 06:51:54 +0100 (CET)
Received: (qmail 20356 invoked by uid 550); 11 Feb 2021 05:51:47 -0000
Mailing-List: contact kernel-hardening-help@lists.openwall.com; run by ezmlm
Precedence: bulk
List-Post: <mailto:kernel-hardening@lists.openwall.com>
List-Help: <mailto:kernel-hardening-help@lists.openwall.com>
List-Unsubscribe: <mailto:kernel-hardening-unsubscribe@lists.openwall.com>
List-Subscribe: <mailto:kernel-hardening-subscribe@lists.openwall.com>
List-ID: <kernel-hardening.lists.openwall.com>
Delivered-To: mailing list kernel-hardening@lists.openwall.com
Received: (qmail 20324 invoked from network); 11 Feb 2021 05:51:46 -0000
X-Originating-IP: 73.37.121.169
From: Joao Moreira <joao@overdrivepizza.com>
To: x86-64-abi@googlegroups.com, kernel-hardening@lists.openwall.com,
 keescook@chromium.org, samitolvanen@google.com, hjl.tools@gmail.com
Subject: Fine-grained Forward CFI on top of Intel CET / IBT
Message-ID: <0537dc00-db0e-265b-9371-783c55717e74@overdrivepizza.com>
Date: Wed, 10 Feb 2021 21:51:29 -0800
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10.14; rv:78.0)
 Gecko/20100101 Thunderbird/78.7.1
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Language: en-US

Hi,

Below is a design proposal on how to support toolchain-enabled 
fine-grained CFI on top of Intel CET. While all the proposed details are 
open for discussion, some are explicitly in need of investigation and 
feedback. A prototype implementation using LLVM and GLIBC's GRTE branch 
is also linked at the end of the document. Any feedback and comments on 
this are very much appreciated.

* Introduction

This proposal leverages the use of Intel's Control-Flow Enforcement 
Technology (CET) feature in a way to enable a Fine-Grained 
Indirect-Branch Tracking policy. As implemented in hardware, CET 
introduces new endbranch (endbr) instructions that should be properly 
placed in the addresses targeted by indirect branches as a way to make 
them valid. This approach is deemed "Coarse-grained" because under the 
policy enforced every endbr instruction is considered a valid target for 
every indirect branch. Fine-grained policies are more restrictive than 
that, in the sense that they enforce a given indirect branch to only 
target a subset of all possible indirect branch destinations. The most 
common fine-grained policy used for the control-flow enforcement is 
requiring that, in an indirect call, the prototype of the targeted 
function matches the prototype of the function pointer used to call it.

The above-described prototype-based approach is already used by 
different tools, including Clang, through the parameter -fsanitize=cfi. 
This implementation uses jump tables to enforce the prototype-based 
policy what, although not harmful from the control-flow granularity 
perspective, can introduce meaningful overheads. The hereby presented 
approach, FineIBT, takes advantage of the CET endbranch instructions to 
enforce additional prototype verifications after indirect 
control-transfers to functions. This implementation materializes the 
concept briefly introduced in the work by Shanbhogue et al. [1], where 
the authors suggest that a software layer should augment the hardware 
capabilities in providing a finer granularity on top of CET. A quick 
evaluation through microbenchmarks described ahead shown that when 
compared to runtimes of binaries with no CFI instrumentation, the Clang 
CFI introduced high overheads ranging from 5% to 52.8%, while FineIBT 
remained between 1% and 6.8%. Experimental tests executed on SPEC CPU 
2017 Benchmark (nc) shown that, in the worst case, FineIBT performed 
with only 3.3% additional overhead when compared to non-instrumented 
binaries.

* Design and Implementation:

FineIBT consists of adding special instrumentation to the generated 
binary to enforce the verification of hashes on function prologues 
whenever these are indirectly called. These hashes are computed over 
function's and function pointer's prototypes during compilation time and 
are always referenced as instruction immediate operands, relying then on 
W^X properties to prevent corruption. For enabling the verification, the 
hash respective to a function pointer is set into a CPU register before 
the indirect call. Since indirect calls must target endbr instructions, 
the function prologue is then augmented with an endbr, similarly as in 
the coarse-grained approach, followed by the hash check respective to 
the function. Given that the endbr instruction is an anchor point 
through which the execution flow must pass when the function is reached 
indirectly, the checks cannot be bypassed. This specific instrumentation 
can be seen below -- in this example, the function <foo> sets 0xdeadbeef 
to the register R11, and then the function <bar> checks it before 
executing. If attackers manage to control the pointer within RAX, they 
won't be able to redirect control-flow in a way to enable the execution 
of functions with a different prototype other than <bar>'s, since the 
hash comparison will fail and the control-flow will reach the hlt 
instruction.

<foo>:
...
movl 0xdeadbeef, R11d
call *RAX
...

<bar>:
endbr
xor 0xdeadbeef, R11d
jz entry
hlt
entry:
...

To reduce the possibility of reuse attacks where an attacker takes 
advantage of residual contents of R11 and then exploits an indirect call 
not preceded by a hash set operation, the proposed instrumentation makes 
use of a xor operation instead of a regular cmp instruction. Under this 
scenario, the content of R11 is always erased after each check, while a 
precise match will also result in R11 contents being zeroed and, thus, 
raising the flag needed for the following jz instruction to take the 
right execution path. The register R11 was picked since it is considered 
a scratch register in the X86-64 ABI, which prevents the need for saving 
and restoring it across called functions.

The above-described instrumentation causes the hash to always be checked 
whenever the function is reached, irrespectively to the given 
control-flow being direct or indirect. Since direct flows don't need to 
be validated and given that these unnecessary hash checks will also 
require hashes to be set before direct calls take place, direct calls 
have their targeted addresses incremented by an offset equivalent to the 
length of the prologue instrumentation, in a way to skip the hash check 
snippet and prevent undesirable overheads for useless operations.

The described instrumentation works regardless of linking-time 
optimizations. Yet, it requires all objects composing a linked binary to 
be FineIBT-enabled. As described, FineIBT is auto-sufficient for 
statically linked binaries and is likely suitable for use-cases such as 
the Linux Kernel.

* Dynamic Shared Objects Compatibility and GLIBC support

Current GLIBC support for CET-enabled binaries allows DSOs with and 
without the CET capabilities to be mixed, on the cost of the policy 
enforcement being disabled in the presence of feature-lacking binaries. 
FineIBT support must follow similar guidelines, allowing FineIBT-enabled 
DSOs to be mixed with other regular DSOs without harming the core 
functionalities of the resulting process. For such, the implementation 
should generate binaries with a FineIBT flag bit in the x86 features ELF 
note. FineIBT, as implemented in the prototype, uses the bit 0x10 since 
bits 0x1 and 0x2 are already taken for IBT and SHSTK CET features, and 
0x4 and 0x8 are taken for LAM features. This way, whenever the linker is 
generating a FineIBT-enabled DSO, it should flag the binary as such.

When loading a new DSO into the process's memory space (either at load 
time or runtime), the loader should check and confirm that all loaded 
DSOs are FineIBT-enabled through checking the FineIBT flag bit, then 
setting a process' specific flag that reflects the state of the 
enforcement. This way, just like in the regular CET support, when the 
loader identifies a binary without the FineIBT flag bit set, it unsets 
the process' specific bit for the feature, disabling the enforcement of 
the policy. During runtime loading (dlopen), if the process is enforcing 
FineIBT, the success of loading a non-FineIBT DSO depends on the loading 
policy being permissive. If this is the case, it will lead to the 
FineIBT enforcement being disabled.

Since FineIBT relies on IBT, its enablement depends on IBT being 
enforced on the process. If IBT is disabled, either at load time or 
during runtime, FineIBT should also be disabled.

Given the presence of the FineIBT bit in the process in an adjacent 
position to the other x86 feature bits, the hash checking 
instrumentation should then be extended to the following snippet which, 
after a failure in the hash check, asserts if FineIBT is being enforced 
before halting the application.

<bar>:
endbr
xor 0xdeadbeef, R11d
jz entry
testb 0x10, FS:0x48
jz entry
hlt
int3
nopw
entry:
...

The resulting instrumentation can be encoded in 25 bytes, which are then 
followed with int3 and nopw instructions to achieve a 32-byte alignment.

At this point, deciding which check should be done first is open for 
debate, since having the hash check first is optimal for a case where 
FineIBT is being enforced, but more costly for processes running with 
FineIBT is disabled.

** PLT

In an execution environment where libraries are present, the access to 
functions that are in a different DSO will happen through the Procedure 
Linkage Table (PLT). To support FineIBT, a special PLT entry is used as 
shown below.

<foo@PLT>:
1:
endbr
cmp 0xdeadbeef, R11d
je 3f
testb 0x10, FS:0x48
hlt
int3
int3
...
2:
mov 0xdeadbeef, R11d
3:
jmpq foo@GOT
int3
...

The proposed PLT entry has a total of 64 bytes and is composed of three 
main pieces, respectively labeled as 1:, 2: and 3:. The first one is the 
piece of the PLT entry reached when the external function is called 
indirectly. First, it anchors the execution with an endbr instruction, 
then it checks the hash and if it is a match, it jumps to the label 3:, 
otherwise following to the FineIBT bit check and eventual execution of 
the hlt instruction, which breaks the invalid flow. The second piece is 
positioned exactly 32 bytes after the PLT entry start and is reached 
through direct calls, which have their targets incremented with an 
offset, as explained in the first section of this document. This piece 
will set the hash in R11d, as an indirect branch is about to take place 
ahead and the to-be-reached function will likely do a hash check in its 
prologue. The third piece, which is reached either through the branch in 
the first piece or through sequential execution from the second piece 
will then jump into the function respective to the PLT entry.

The standard lazy binding done in ELF binaries can be harmful to the 
proposed scheme because, on the occasion of a target not being already 
resolved, the dynamic linker will be invoked and this will lead to 
control flows which may destroy the hash previously set in R11. Given 
that this hash should never be stored in writable memory due to security 
reasons, the design does not consider saving it on the stack for later 
restore, instead it relies on eager binding, which is also widely 
supported by most standard toolchains (it can be set through -Wl,-z,now 
in lld). Because eager binding is in place, the need for resolving 
dynamically linked symbols no longer exists. In face of that, the second 
PLT used in IBT binaries (as described in the X86-64 ABI) is not needed 
for FineIBT binaries.

Given that 2: does not have an endbranch instruction and, then, is only 
supposed to be accessed through direct branches, the respective hash set 
operations shouldn't be exploitable.

Additionally, the use of eager binding enables .GOT.PLT entries to be 
read-only, which prevents the following indirect-call from being abused 
and opens a window for optimization. In this scenario, the instruction 
"no-track prefix" can be used to allow a jump over the target's hash 
check instrumentation, preventing needless instructions from being 
executed. Optimizations in the PLT scheme weren't extensively evaluated 
and are still open for investigation.

To emit the PLT entry correctly, the linker needs to be informed about 
the hash values respective to the functions being reached through the 
entry. Since a linker handles binaries, prototype information is not 
available at the moment of linking. To overcome this, the compiler was 
augmented with the capability of emitting a special section named 
.ibt.fine.plt in the generated object. This section brings a table with 
the hashes of the external symbols which might get a PLT entry at the 
moment of linking, making it possible for the linker to retrieve the 
information needed to emit the PLT table. This section does not need to 
be included in the final linked object and is discarded after being used 
by the linker.

For functions that should not perform hash checks due to compatibility 
issues (such as functions indirectly called from assembly code or those 
called from pointers with opaque prototypes), the proposed 
implementation brings the attribute "CoarseCfCheck" which leads the 
compiler into generating the respective function without the hash checks 
but with the endbr instruction, plus an instruction that zeroes R11 (to 
prevent reuse attacks), plus padding nops (to ensure the 32 bytes 
alignment).

* Security Considerations:

The most obvious attack vector regarding the proposed implementation is 
an attempt to control both R11 and a function pointer in the moment of 
an indirect call. In general, assuming that an attacker cannot diverge 
control-flow arbitrarily because of the coarse-grained CET primitives 
and that the proposed instrumentation overwrites the contents of R11 
with a new hash right before the indirect call takes place, the window 
of opportunity for such attacks is very small (but maybe existent when 
interfacing with hand-written assembly code). Either way, to squeeze it 
even further, the compiler can remove R11 from the bank of available 
registers, only using it for holding the hashes. The expectancy is that 
by having none or fewer references to R11 in the binary (except for the 
hash sets and checks) attackers won't be able to control it.

Notice that using a fixed R11 is not a requirement for the whole scheme 
to work, but a hardening feature.

* Hash Computation:

Up to this point, the proper way of computing the prototype hashes was 
not evaluated, and this topic is still open.

* Future Improvements:

Right now, three key details remain explicitly in need for attention: 
(i) how to optimize the PLT to prevent unnecessary overheads, (ii) in 
which order should the hash and FineIBT flag bit be checked, and (iii) 
the best way to compute the prototype hashes. Of course that all other 
topics and ideas are open for discussion and improvement.

* Evaluation:

To evaluate the performance of FineIBT we performed two sets of tests. 
First, we implemented a micro-benchmark with three different 
applications: (i) a bubble-sort implementation in which the swap 
operation was invoked indirectly; (ii) a Fibonacci sequence calculator 
in which the recursion is made through indirect calls; and (iii) a dummy 
loop which calls an empty function indirectly. These three applications 
were selected as the indirect calls represent a significant part of 
their computation, and they were compiled under the following four 
different setups: (i) NO CFI: regular binary compilation, with no 
special flags; (ii) CLANG CFI: binaries compiled with the default Clang 
CFI, which enforces a jump-table-based policy (through -flto 
-fsanitize=cfi -fsanitize-cfi-cross-dso -fvisibility=default 
-fno-sanitize-cfi-canonical-jump-tables); (iii) COARSE CET: binaries 
generated with IBT as supported by Clang only (through 
-fcf-protection=full); and (iv) FINE CET: binaries generated with 
FineIBT, as proposed above, with R11 reserved. All applications are 
single-threaded and each was run 10 times. The numbers compared and 
shown are the average of the runtime values observed.

Due to difficulties in compiling GLIBC with the CLANG CFI 
instrumentation, we replaced the library with MUSL for these 
experiments. MUSL 1.2.0 was used with some small changes [2] to add very 
basic support for CET plus some modifications to make it compatible with 
FineIBT.

The tests were run on a machine equipped with an 11th Gen Intel(R) 
Core(TM) i5-1145G7 & 2.60GHz 8 Core CPU with 16G of RAM. The operating 
system for the tests was a CET-enabled Linux Fedora 33 (Workstation 
Edition). CET was verified to be active through the execution of an 
application that violates the enforced policy. All applications were 
dynamically linked to MUSL, which was also compiled under the same 
control-flow enforcement policy as the application itself (i.e.: NO CFI, 
COARSE CET, FINE CET, or CLANG CFI). As a replacement for libgcc, the 
LLVM runtime library compiled with the coarse-grained IBT policy was 
used for the NO CFI, CLANG, and COARSE CET setups, and with FineIBT 
policy for FINE CET.

The numbers observed for these tests can be seen below. The baseline for 
the overhead comparison in parenthesis is the setup without CFI (NO 
CFI). The times presented are in msecs and were collected through perf 
for 10 runs of each application. The parameters for the applications 
were a 50000 entries randomly-generated array for bubbl (the same array 
was used on each run and setup), 44 for the Fibonacci computation, and 
10^10 calls for the dummy application.

       |   NO CFI  |     CLANG CFI     |    COARSE CET     | FINE CET     |
bubbl |  5729.11  |  6014.67  (4.98%) |  5713.85 (-0.27%) | 5837.13 
(1.02%) |
fibon |  4539.09  |  5514.07 (21.48%) |  4508.75 (-0.67%) | 4846.83 
(6.78%) |
dummy | 15296.34  | 23367.13 (52.76%) | 14687.78 (-3.98%) | 15455.24 
(1.04%) |

Willing to evaluate the effects of this instrumentation on a heavier 
workload, we did an experimental test running four applications from 
SPEC CPU 2017 Benchmark (nc). Given the use of opaque pointers in the 
applications and that no source code changes are allowed in the 
benchmark, we modified FineIBT to use the same tag for all different 
prototypes, emulating the actual performance overheads while not 
enforcing a real fine-grained policy. We also did not run the CLANG CFI 
setup. This time, the SPEC CPU 2017 applications were linked to a GLIBC 
compiled accordingly to the respective setup. The GLIBC support for 
FineIBT was implemented on top of a GRTE branch, which is known for 
being compatible with Clang.

The numbers observed for these tests can be seen below as collected and 
presented by the SPEC CPU 2017 framework, with runtimes presented in 
Seconds. A total of 10 runs were executed for each application, and the 
best fitting result was selected by SPEC. The baseline for the 
comparison in parenthesis is, once again, the setup without CFI (NO CFI).

                 |  NO CFI  |    COARSE CET    |     FINE CET    |
600.perlbench_s |  248.83  |  247.67 (-0.47%) |  257.14 (3.34%) |
602.gcc_s       |  365.47  |  369.03 ( 0.97%) |  368.75 (0.90%) |
605.mcf_s       |  576.80  |  570.63 (-1.07%) |  579.86 (0.53%) |
625.x264_s      |  152.63  |  152.63 ( 0.00%) |  154.21 (1.04%) |

* Related implementations

The work by Martin Abadi [3] is assumed to be the first academic paper 
published on Control-Flow Integrity. Despite that, ideas that strongly 
mold the current design and goals of the CFI state-of-the-art were 
previously published in the document pax-future.txt [4]. The core idea 
behind a fine-grained forward-edge CFI scheme on top of CET was 
originally surfaced by Shanbhogue et al. [1].

 From a functional perspective, when compared to the existing 
fine-grained CFI policy supported by Clang [5], both schemes provide the 
same level of granularity, but FineIBT does not depend on jump tables, 
preventing the overheads that can be introduced by these.

Although wired differently, FineIBT is not the first CFI mechanism to 
use registers to carry hashes for prototype checking. Microsoft's xFG 
[6] uses a similar resource but anchors the control-flow execution with 
tags embedded into the binary. Other implementations that also use tags 
embedded into the binary, but don't depend on registers, are PaX RAP [7] 
and kCFI [8] (both focused on the kernel context).

Up to this point, we did not compare FineIBT's performance with any 
other CFI implementation besides Clang's.

When compared to schemes that use binary-embedded tags, FineIBT doesn't 
depend on reading tags that are mixed with code, which makes it 
compatible with approaches such as execute-only memory [9]. As is, 
FineIBT also provides some degree of compatibility to dynamically adapt 
and interact with non-FineIBT DSOs without requiring any binary changes, 
even though this comes at the price of disabling the enforcement.

* Source-code:

Prototype implementations of FineIBT are available in:

FineIBT capable compiler:
- https://github.com/intel/fineibt_llvm/

FineIBT capable GLIBC (a fork from GRTE):
- https://github.com/intel/fineibt_glibc/

Some building scripts and a test application:
- https://github.com/intel/fineibt_testing/

The easiest way to build everything (if your environment has all the 
needed tools):

git clone https://github.com/intel/fineibt_testing/
cd fineibt_testing
git clone https://github.com/intel/fineibt_llvm/
git clone https://github.com/intel/fineibt_glibc/
./build-infra.sh # and go enjoy a good cup of coffee for a few minutes...
./build-examples.sh
cd examples/build
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=./ # have fun :)

You may want to edit the building scripts to adapt details, such as the 
number of cores or to test different configuration setups. Also, notice 
that, as is in the prototype, fineibt_llvm is emitting the same tag 
regardless of the prototypes.

* Acknowledgments:

The author would like to thank Vedvyas Shanbhogue, Michael LeMay, 
Hongjiu Lu (Intel), and Prof. Vasilis Kemerlis (Brown University) for 
meaningful contributions and insightful discussions during the 
development of this research.

* References:

1 - Vedvyas Shanbhogue, Deepak Gupta, and Ravi Sahita. 2019. Security 
Analysis of Processor Instruction Set Architecture for Enforcing 
Control-Flow Integrity. In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop 
on Hardware and Architectural Support for Security and Privacy (HASP 
’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 8, 
1–11. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3337167.3337175

2 - Joao Moreira. Add CET IBT Support to MUSL. 2020. 
https://www.openwall.com/lists/musl/2020/10/19/3

3 - Martín Abadi, Mihai Budiu, Úlfar Erlingsson, and Jay Ligatti. 2005. 
Control-flow integrity. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on 
Computer and communications security (CCS ’05). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 340–353. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1102120.1102165

4 - PaX Team. 2003. pax-future.txt. 
https://pax.grsecurity.net/docs/pax-future.txt

5 - Clang 12 Documentation. Control Flow Integrity. 
https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ControlFlowIntegrity.html

6 - David "dwizzzle" Weston. Bluehat Shanghai 2019. Advanced Windows 
Security. https://query.prod.cms.rt.microsoft.com/cms/api/am/binary/RE37dMC

7 - PaX Team. 2015. RAP: RIP ROP. 
https://pax.grsecurity.net/docs/PaXTeam-H2HC15-RAP-RIP-ROP.pdf.

8 - Joao Moreira, Sandro Rigo, Michalis Polychronakis, and Vasileios P. 
Kemerlis. 2017. Drop the ROP: Fine-Grained Control-Flow Integrity for 
the Linux Kernel. BLACK HAT ASIA 2017, Singapore. 
https://github.com/kcfi/docs/blob/master/kCFI_whitepaper.pdf

9 - Rick Edgecombe. 2019. XOM for KVM guest userspace. 
https://lore.kernel.org/kvm/20191003212400.31130/

